# Seth Duck's CS-499 Capstone for SNHU Computer Science Degree

## My Professional Self-Assessment
### Overview of the Skills Learned
Within the coursework the Computer Science Degree at SNHU has helped me hone and shape what I want to do with the degree. I started this journey after a database went down for my job. I thought about how I could help redo the database but better. It was a flat single page and I started digging into what a relational database was after I spoke to one of the original developers. I started this degree after my interest was piqued and here, I am at the end of my journey with a new interest. I have found the art of mobile phone application development to be very interesting. The skills of knowing the basics were well needed throughout the process of this degree and gave a good basis for me to learn the craft. With each class the importance of setting up code that others can read and understand is important for collaboration. The ability to listen to stakeholders and annotate it accurately for creation is very important. If you cannot capture and set yourself up for success, then you will end up spending time on things they did not ask for and may miss the mark altogether.

It is also important to work through every aspect of the code to accomplish something that not only functions but does so in a timely manner, uses proper security to protect what you are holding, and is structured in a way that is logical and well throughout. One can accomplish these things using proper data structures, databases, algorithms, security protocols and checks, and proper engineering of the code they are using. The coursework at SNHU thoroughly taught each aspect that is required to make code that is ethical and well throughout. Without a proper understanding of these aspects then you will have security issues and vulnerabilities that will lead to major leaks in data and breaches in privacy. It will also lead to long processes to accomplish the same calculations with inefficient algorithms. Knowing the dangers and learning how to prevent them is half the battle and I have accomplished these skills thoroughly within my time at this institute. I feel confident that I have learned the skills needed to begin a career in the field of mobile phone application development or any other related field. I have learned the ability to take a concept and implement it through research and knowledge gained in the courses and am ready to tackle what lies ahead of me.

## Summery of Artifacts Presented 

1. The first area that we were to show proficiency in is Software Design and Engineering. The artifact that I chose was a simple Rock Paper Scissors application that I created using Kotlin which is starting to surpass Java due to its concise coding and ease to learn. This original file was learned in an outside course that I purchased by Denis Panjuta. This demonstrated the basics of coding using Kotlin. I had the idea to take this simple application and turn it into a full application with a user interface. I added buttons that when pressed execute a function which generates a random number that is then converted into either Rock, Paper, or Scissors. It is then compared to the user’s choice and a winner is declared. After the initial updates I added a score tracker and finally added 2 other themes that could be chosen. This demonstrates the ability to lay out an application and design a usable interface for end users to interact with. It also shows the ability to engineer code that can be quickly executed after something is pressed. I did struggle some with my equipment for this development. I have found that I am able to break android studio by using all the available memory my computer has. I was able to figure out how to clear out the caches and get the emulator to work again. I was also able to figure out how to create more complex coding to accomplish the other themes. This was a huge boost to my confidence seeing something I came up with work and function as intended. Some of the skills that I demonstrated were the ability to build a collaborative enviornment to support a diverse audience. This was accomplished through the in depth comments I made to ensure clear understanding of each part of the code. This also ties into clear communications that are coherent and technically sound. This would be great for beginners to learn how this new coding language works. The code has been around now sense 2016 and is well established within the rhelm of mobile phone application development and server side applications. This application is created with the goal of bringing entertainment to every user through the use of cell phones. The [Artifact One Files](https://github.com/ARealLifeDuck/ARealLifeDuck.github.io/tree/main/Artifact1) can be found here.

2. The second area for this capstone is Algorithms and Data Structures. The artifact chosen was from the CS 260 course. It is a linked list vector that demonstrates the ability to keep data structured in such a way that it can be more easily searched and organized. This application allows users to prepend, find, remove, sort two different ways, and add a bid to the list. There are a few more functions that can be seen within the code as well. The biggest struggle I had with this was not being able to find my original files to go from. I had to search for some files that got me on the right track to finish what I had done in my time within the course. I also had to remember how to complete some of the functions that I wanted to accomplish within the course. The main outcomes this covers mostly revolves around using algorithmic principles which focus on effecient storage of data within an applicaiton. This uses the link list approach which sorts and stores data in a logical mannor rather than in a random order that it is given. This helps speed up the search time for the data within the table. The [Artifact Two Files](https://github.com/ARealLifeDuck/ARealLifeDuck.github.io/tree/main/Artifact2) can been found here.

3. The last area to demonstrate mastery is Databases. For this artifact I found a demonstration of how to integrate Room into Android Studio for a local database. The original video can be found [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bOd3wO0uFr8). Room is a very common local database integration that allows you to save data between sessions on your phone. I took the overall structure of this application and changed each file to take the data from IT-145 inside of it. This expanded the functionality of three original fields to ten and gives the user an updated view of all the information required to track each animal for service use. The application can add new animals and delete ones that no longer need to be tracked in the system. There are 4 fields that you can order each animal from at the top of the screen. The biggest issue that I ran into was using other data types than strings. For this demonstration I currently use only strings which can cause some issues for sorting the data and making sure it is valid. This demonstrates the ability to collaborate and combine ideas and techniques together. It is a great demonstration on how a clearly artiqulated concept can be recieved and then modified for a different use. It shows that professional-quality of oral, written and cisual communication can be recieved by users and help push this field even further to the next generation. This delivers proof that established additions to the base code can be used to achieve greater profitency for exicuting a plan by using these additional libraries and sets of code. This helped me accomplish a more complex code that added a user interface for greater ease of use to end users. It can also help people with a greater mindset for security due to the implimentaion of secure coding within well established additions to a program. I was pleased to the outcomes of my Android Studio additions and integrations that are demonstrated within these projects. The [Artifact Three Files](https://github.com/ARealLifeDuck/ARealLifeDuck.github.io/tree/main/Artifact3/RoomGuideAndroid-masterOriginal) can be found here.

For the code reviews you can find them [here](https://github.com/ARealLifeDuck/ARealLifeDuck.github.io/tree/main/Code%20Reviews) at this location. Thanks for stopping by.
